---
#template: home.html
icon: material/alert-outline
description: Nullam urna elit, malesuada eget finibus ut, ac tortor. 
hide:
  - footer
---


!!!warning
    Page in progress. There may be typos and the content is subject to change.

<a href="../integral/#1.1"><b>definition</b></a>


# Measure Theory Basics
## Introduction
Measure theory is a branch of mathematics that provides a rigorous framework for understanding and quantifying the concept of "size" or "measure" of sets. It deals with the study of measures, which are functions that assign a non-negative real number to subsets of a given set.


In probability theory,  measure theory introduces key concepts such as 
probability spaces, sample spaces and events. The numerical values that are 
assigned to events will capture the likelihood or uncertainty of outcomes.
These concepts establish a solid foundation for studying probabilistic 
models and their properties.



## Classes of sets
In this subsection we will give the definitions and basic results of some classes of sets that will allow us to define measurable sets and state the measure extension theorem cf. <a href="#measure_extension_theorem"><b>theorem</b></a>.
We will note $\Omega$ a non-empty set.

!!! definition
    Let $\mathcal{A} \subseteq \mathcal{P}(\Omega)$. The class $\mathcal{A}$ is called  a **semiring** if :

    * $\emptyset \in \mathcal{A}$,
    * for any $A, B \in \mathcal{A}$ then $B \setminus A$ is a finite union of mutually disjoint sets in $\mathcal{A}$,
    * $\mathcal{A}$ is $\cap$-closed i.e. closed under finite intersections.

    An **algebra** (resp. **$\sigma$-algebra**) if :

    * $\Omega \in \mathcal{A}$,
    * $\mathcal{A}$ is closed under complements,
    * Closed under finite (resp. countable) unions, and we write $\mathcal{A}$ is $\cup$-closed (resp. $\sigma$-$\cup$-closed).

The $\sigma$-algebras are the classes of sets that will be considered as ***events*** in probability theory, and more generally the classes on which measures are defined.

!!! lemma
    The class $\mathcal{A}$ is an **algebra** if and only if:

    * $\Omega \in \mathcal{A}$,
    * $\mathcal{A}$ is $\setminus$-closed i.e. for any $A, B \in \mathcal{A}$ then $A \setminus B \in \mathcal{A}$,
    * $\mathcal{A}$ is $\cup$-closed.

    If $\mathcal{A}$ is an algebra (resp. $\sigma$-algebra) then $\mathcal{A}$ is $\cap$-closed (resp. $\sigma$-$\cap$-closed).

!!! proof
    We leave the proof of the first part to the reader.
    The second part is a consequence of de Morgan's rule: $(\cup A_i)^c = \cap A_i^c$.

It is easy to show that for any arbitrary non-empty index set $I$ and $(\mathcal{A}_i)_{i \in I}$ a family of algebras (resp. $\sigma$-algeras) the intersection $\cap_I\mathcal{A}_i$ is also an algebra (resp. $\sigma$-algebra).

!!! definition
    Let $\mathcal{E} \subseteq \mathcal{P}(\Omega)$ and $I$ the set of $\sigma$-algebras of $\Omega$ containing $\mathcal{E}.$
    The $\sigma$-algebra
    $$
    \sigma(\mathcal{E}):= \cap_{\mathcal{A} \in I}\mathcal{A}
    $$
    is called the $\sigma$-algebra generated by $\mathcal{E}$ and $\mathcal{E}$ is called a generator of $\sigma(\mathcal{E}).$

Note that in the definition above the index set $I$ is never empty since it contains the $\sigma$-algebra $\mathcal{P}(\Omega).$
It is also clear from the definiton above that if $\mathcal{E}$ is a $\sigma$-algebra then $\mathcal{E}=\sigma(\mathcal{E})$
and if $\mathcal{E'} \subseteq \mathcal{E}$ then $\sigma(\mathcal{E'}) \subseteq \sigma(\mathcal{E})$.

!!! definition
    Let $\mathcal{A} \subseteq \mathcal{P}(\Omega)$ and $A \subseteq \Omega$ non-empty.
    The class
    $$
    \mathcal{A}\vert_A := \\{A \cap B \\ ; B \in \mathcal{A} \\}
    $$
    is called the trace of $\mathcal{A}$ on $A$ or the restriction of $\mathcal{A}$ to $A$.

It can easily be shown that if $\mathcal{A}$ is an algebra (resp. $\sigma$-algebra) on $\Omega$ then
$\mathcal{A}\vert_A$ is an algebra (resp. $\sigma$-algebra) on $A$ for any non-empty $A \subseteq \Omega$.

## Measure Spaces
  Let $\mathcal{A} \subseteq \mathcal{P}(\Omega)$,
  $\mu: \mathcal{A} \to [0, \infty]$ a set function,
  $I$ an index set and $(A_i)_{i \in I}$ such that $A_i \in \mathcal{A}$ for any $i \in I$.
!!! definition
    We say that $\mu$ is :

    * **monotone** if $\mu(A) \leq \mu(B)$ for any $A \subseteq B$  in $\mathcal{A}$,
    * **additive** if $\mu(\cup_{i \in I}A_i) = \sum_{i \in I}\mu(A_i)$ for $I$ finite and $(A_i)_{i \in I}$ mutually disjoint,
    * **$\sigma$-additive** if $\mu(\cup_{i \in I}A_i) = \sum_{i \in I}\mu(A_i)$ for $I$ countable and $(A_i)_{i \in I}$ mutually disjoint,
    * **subadditive** if for any $A\subseteq \cup_{i \in I}A_i$ and $I$ finite we have $\mu(A) \leq \sum_{i \in I}\mu(A_i)$,
    * **$\sigma$-subadditive** if for any $A\subseteq \cup_{i \in I}A_i$ and $I$ countable we have $\mu(A) \leq \sum_{i \in I}\mu(A_i)$,
    * a **content** if $\mathcal{A}$ is a semiring, $\mu(\emptyset)=0$ and $\mu$ is additive.

!!! definition
    A set function $\mu : \mathcal{A} \to [0, \infty]$ is called a **measure** on $(\Omega, \mathcal{A})$ if $\mathcal{A}$ is a $\sigma$-algebra, $\mu(\emptyset)=0$ and $\mu$ is $\sigma$-additive.

Let $\mu$ be a content on a semiring $\mathcal{A}$. 

!!! definition
    We say that $\mu$ is **finite** if $\mu(\Omega) < \infty$ and  **$\sigma$-finite** if there exists a family $(\Omega_n)_{n \in \mathbb{N}}$ in $\mathcal{A}$ such that $\Omega = \cup_{n \in \mathbb{N}}\Omega_n$ and $\mu(\Omega_n) < \infty$ for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$.

Let $\Omega$ be a non-empty set and $\mathcal{A} \subseteq \mathcal{P}(\Omega)$ and $\mu : \mathcal{A} \to [0, \infty]$ a set function.

!!! definition
    * We say that the pair $(\Omega, \mathcal{A})$ is a **measurable space** if $\mathcal{A}$ is a $\sigma$-algebra and $\mu$ a measure on $\mathcal{A}$.
    * If $(\Omega, \mathcal{A})$ is a measurable space subsets of $\Omega$ in $\mathcal{A}$ are called **measurable sets**.
    * A measurable space $(\Omega, \mathcal{A})$ is called **discrete** if $\Omega$ is at most countable and $\mathcal{A}=\mathcal{P}(\Omega)$.
    * The set of finite (resp. $\sigma$-finite) measures on a measurable space $(\Omega, \mathcal{A})$ is denoted $\mathcal{M}_f(\Omega, \mathcal{A})$ (resp. $\mathcal{M}_{\sigma}(\Omega, \mathcal{A})$).

Let $\mu$ be a content on a $\sigma$-algebra $\mathcal{A}$

!!!lemma
    The following three properties are equivalent 

    * $\mu$ is a measure (it is a $\sigma$-additive)
    * $\mu$ is $\sigma$-subadditive
    * $\mu$ is lower semicontinuous


## Measure Extension Theorem

<a id="measure_extension_theorem"></a>
!!! thm
    Let $\mathcal{A} \subseteq \mathcal{P}(\Omega)$ be a semiring and  $\mu: \mathcal{A} \to [0, \infty]$ additive, $\sigma$-subadditive, $\sigma$-finite and $\mu(\emptyset)=0$.
    There exists a unique $\sigma$-finite measure $\tilde{\mu }$ on $\sigma(\mathcal{A})$ such that for any $A \in \mathcal{A}$:
    $$
    \tilde{\mu }(A) = \mu(A)
    $$

??? proof "Sketch of the proof"
    The proof of this theorem is beyond the scope of these lectures however we give a sketch here of the construction of the extended measure $\tilde{\mu }$.
    From $\mu$ a set function $\mu^*$ on $\mathcal{P}(\Omega)$ is defined as follows: for any $A \subseteq \Omega$:

    $$
    \mu^*(A):= \inf_{(A_i)_{i \in I} \in \mathcal{U}(A)} \sum_{i \in I} \mu(A_i)
    $$

    where $\mathcal{U}(A)$ is the set of countable coverings $(A_i)_{i \in I}$ of $A$ (i.e. $A \subseteq \cup_{i \in I}A_i$) with $A_i \in \mathcal{A}$ for all $i \in I$.
    The set function $\mu^*$ is an *outer measure* that defines a measure on the $\sigma$-algebra $\mathcal{M}(\mu^*)$ of $\mu^*$-measurable sets. Moreover for any $A \in \mathcal{A}$, $\mu(A) = \mu^*(A)$, $\mathcal{A} \subseteq \mathcal{M}(\mu^*)$ hence $\sigma(\mathcal{A}) \subseteq \mathcal{M}(\mu^*)$  and $\mu^*$ is the unique measure that extends $\mu$ to $\sigma(\mathcal{A})$.
## Lebesgue-Borel Measure
* Borel sigma algebra of a topological space
* The example of $\mathbb{R}^n$
* List of generators of the Borel sigma algebra on $\mathbb{R}^n$
* Make the remark that the classes of generator cited are countable and that this is a very crucial property
